---
title: "Pyodide 0.19.0 release"
date: 2022-01-10
draft: true
tags: ["release", "announcement"]
author: "Hood Chatham and Roman Yurchak, on behalf of the Pyodide team"
showToc: true
TocOpen: false
draft: false
hidemeta: false
comments: false
# description: ""
disableHLJS: true # to disable highlightjs
disableShare: false
hideSummary: false
searchHidden: true
ShowReadingTime: true
ShowBreadCrumbs: true
ShowPostNavLinks: true
---

Pyodide 0.19 is a major release focused on improving the build system, updating
scientific computing packages, and improving the workflow for loading Python
code.

Here are a few highlights. For the complete list of changes see the
[changelog](https://pyodide.org/en/latest/project/changelog.html#version-0-19-0).

### Removal of function pointer cast emulation

Some Python C extensions use function pointer casting, which is an unspecified
behavior according to the C specification. However, all common native C
compilers generate code that works fine. This is not the case with Emscripten
when building for WebAssembly, which will fail on function pointer casts. As a
workaround we have been using Emscripten's `-s EMULATE_FUNCTION_POINTER_CASTS`
flag, which emits code to emulate function pointer casts at runtime. This has
significant overhead.

In version 0.19 we were able to remove the function cast emulation by using
JavaScript method call trampolines in the few places where the cast function
pointers are called. This allowed us to increase the maximum supported recursion
depth to the default value of 1000, decrease the compiled code size by ~25% and
make Python run faster by ~15%. For more details about this work, see our post
on [Function Pointer Cast Handling in
Pyodide](https://blog.pyodide.org/posts/function-pointer-cast-handling/).

### SciPy Upgrade

The initial version of SciPy added to Pyodide was 0.17.1 from 2016. Since then
we have had major difficulties updating it because SciPy is large and difficult
to build. We particularly struggle with the use of Fortran which has no reliable
compiler supporting WebAssembly. Our inability to update SciPy in turn prevented
us from updating other scientific Python packages, including scikit-learn,
scikit-image and statsmodels.

SciPy was finally updated in
[pyodide/pyodide#2065](https://github.com/pyodide/pyodide/pull/2065) after a
great deal of effort. There are still known issues with SciPy in Pyodide (you
can see the current status of the scipy test suite
[here](https://github.com/pyodide/pyodide/pull/2065#issuecomment-1004243045)).
However, this update is a major milestone in getting us closer to the
development version of SciPy and allowing us to contribute fixes upstream.

### New `unpackArchive` and `pyimport` apis

We added new APIs `pyodide.unpackArchive` and `pyodide.pyimport`.

These are part of our goal of encouraging people to develop their Python code
for use in Pyodide like normal Python packages and to call into their Python
packages directly from JavaScript, rather than using `pyodide.runPython`.

Users can develop a Python package, then zip it and install it with
`pyodide.unpackArchive`, import it with `pyodide.pyimport` and then call their
Python functions directly from Javascript.

See the discussion here: [pyodide/pyodide#1940](https://github.com/pyodide/pyodide/issues/1940).

### New `pyfetch` API

We added the `pyfetch` API to which is a convenience wrapper to make fetch
requests from Python and convert the response directly into various Python types
while avoiding copying data as much as possible.

### Micropip improvements

The observability of micropip was improved with better error messages, an easier
way to debug missing wheels, and a way to list the packages micropip has
installed.

### Type conversions improvements and a new JS calling convention

We added polish to core features based on user feedback, including bugfixes and
convenience improvements.

We added several functions that allow conversion of JavaScript buffers to
various Python objects with as few copies as possible, which are useful
internally to Pyodide and should also help applications processing data to do
faster conversions in certain cases.

We also changed the calling convention for invoking a JavaScript function from
Python so that in some cases no special care needs to be taken to call
JavaScript functions from Python without leaking Python objects. We also made it
much easier to call asynchronous Python functions from JavaScript.

### Acknowledgements

We thank all contributors to this release as well as all users who provided
feedback and reported issues.

The following people commited to Pyodide in this release:

Alexey Ignatiev, Alex Hall, Bart Broere, Cyrille Bogaert, etienne, Grimmer,
Grimmer Kang, Gyeongjae Choi, Hao Zhang, Hood Chatham, Ian Clester, Jan Max
Meyer, LeoPsidom, Liumeo, Michael Christensen, Owen Ou, Roman Yurchak, Seungmin
Kim, Sylvain, Thorsten Beier, Wei Ouyang, Will Lachance
