---
title: "Pyodide 0.20.0 release"
date: 2022-04-09
tags: ["release", "announcement"]
author: "Hood Chatham on behalf of the Pyodide team"
showToc: true
TocOpen: false
hidemeta: false
comments: false
# description: ""
disableHLJS: true # to disable highlightjs
disableShare: false
hideSummary: false
searchHidden: true
ShowReadingTime: true
ShowBreadCrumbs: true
ShowPostNavLinks: true
---

Pyodide 0.20 is a major release focused on improving our system for building and
packaging Python modules. 

We upgraded to Python 3.10. This comes with a speed boost of around 15% in
Firefox and 22% in Chrome.

We updated almost every package to the most recent release, and moved closer to
using upstream Emscripten. Pyodide 0.20 also includes many small bug fixes and
usability improvements.

For the complete list of changes see the
[changelog](https://pyodide.org/en/stable/project/changelog.html#version-0-20-0).

## Build system

We dramatically reworked our build system backend. The result is simpler, more
powerful, and less error prone. 

We now produce Python wheels for packages instead of Emscripten file packager
archives. These are much easier to work with: they can be processed with any
software that handles zip files and also by all of the Python tools for handling
wheels. For most pure Python packages, we now use their wheels directly from
PyPI.

We updated our system to use `pypa/build`, including (mostly) isolated builds.
This way packages can use custom build systems, including different versions of
setuptools.

We added support for C++ exception handling in packages and made other many
minor tweaks to make it easier to port packages.

## Upstreaming patches into Python 3.11

We worked with the CPython upstream to include our patches into Python 3.11.
Experimental builds of Pyodide based on tip-of-tree Python confirm that
everything works without patches.

## Emscripten Update

We upgraded from Emscripten 2.0.16 to Emscripten 2.0.27. We are still a fair
distance behind the newest Emscripten release due to a bug in Firefox versions
95 -- 98 but fixed in Firefox 99beta. 

Emscripten 2.0.27 is a major improvement over Emscripten 2.0.16, particularly
with regards to linking: many linker errors have been changed from call-time
errors to load-time errors or compile-time errors. In particular, this allowed
us to fix tons of bugs in our port of Scipy. Almost all of Scipy v1.8.0 works
correctly in Pyodide!

### Acknowledgements

Thanks to everyone who contributed code to this release and to all users who
reported issues and provided feedback. Thanks to the Emscripten team,
particularly [Alon Zakai](https://github.com/kripken) and [Sam
Clegg](https://github.com/sbc100), for developing Emscripten, providing
technical advice about its use, and for reviewing and merging our patches.
Thanks to the Python team, particularly [Christian
Heimes](https://github.com/tiran) and [Brett
Cannon](https://github.com/brettcannon) for their work adding upstream support
for the Emscripten platform.

The following people commited to Pyodide in this release:

Boris Feld, Christian Staudt, Gabriel Fougeron, Gyeongjae Choi, Henry Schreiner,
Hood Chatham, Jo Bovy, Karthikeyan Singaravelan, Leo Psidom, Liumeo, Luka
Mamukashvili, Madhur Tandon, Paul Korzhyk, Roman Yurchak, Seungmin Kim, Thorsten
Beier, Tom White, and Will Lachance
