---
title: "Pyodide 0.21.0 release"
date: 2022-08-02
tags: ["release", "announcement"]
author: "Hood Chatham on behalf of the Pyodide team"
showToc: true
TocOpen: false
hidemeta: false
comments: false
# description: ""
disableHLJS: true # to disable highlightjs
disableShare: false
hideSummary: false
searchHidden: true
ShowReadingTime: true
ShowBreadCrumbs: true
ShowPostNavLinks: true
---

Pyodide 0.21 is a major release focused on improvements to the systems for
building and loading packages. We made it much easier to build and use binary
wheels that are not included in our distribution. We added support for Rust
packages and made major progress in simplifying support for CMake packages. We
also added 34 new packages including a large number of popular packages, for
example bitarray, opencv-python, shapely, and xgboost.

We updated the compiler from Emscripten v2.0.27 to Emscripten v3.1.14 which
includes major improvements including many fixes to the Python core test suite
contributed by us and by Christian Heimes. There were also many minor
improvements and bug fixes to the Pyodide Python package.

We separated the Pyodide test system into a pytest plugin called
`pytest-pyodide` and released it as a Python package. This may help people
testing dedicated Pyodide applications.

We have also done a lot of work outside of the Pyodide repository, on Rust,
Emscripten, PyO3, Numpy, and on other Python packages. We hope to continue with
more community work on Python packages in the future.

For the complete list of changes see the
[changelog](https://pyodide.org/en/stable/project/changelog.html#version-0-21-0).

## Building binary wheels for Pyodide

In Pyodide 0.21.0 we have added experimental support for building binary
packages as wheels for Pyodide "out of tree", similarly to how standard Python
wheels are built.

Pyodide has so far used a monolothic collection of package recipes inspired by
Conda to build binary extensions. Using a collection of package recipes has
significant advantages, allowing us to maintain patches and test all of the
packages together. However, it also has several downsides:

1. It requires all packages to be maintained in a monorepo.

2. It doesn't easily allow packages to support Pyodide in their CI.

3. There is no convenient way for someone to use a private package with a
   binary extension with Pyodide.

4. There is no good way to have several different versions of the same package.
   For instance, this would be very helpful for using Pyodide to make
   interactive documentation for old versions of a package.

We can build most packages out of tree, though this feature is still a bit
experimental. We will continue using the collection of package recipes for our
in-tree builds. Our goal is to add Pyodide to the CI of key packages, for
instance as a proof of concept we have added Pyodide to the Numpy CI in a draft
PR. 

For example, a simple github action to build a wheel for use with Pyodide could
look like:
```yaml
runs-on: ubuntu-latest
  steps:
  - uses: actions/checkout@v3
  - uses: actions/setup-python@v4
     with:
       python-version: 3.10.2
  - uses: mymindstorm/setup-emsdk@v11
     with:
       version: 3.1.14
  - run: pip install pyodide-build==0.21.0
  - run: pyodide build
```
Note that it is not necessary to check out the Pyodide repository, to use a
docker image, or anything complicated like that. Testing the package is still
complicated. We are actively working on making the testing similar to testing
normal Python packages.

In order to limit CI time, we only run a small fragment of each package's tests
in Pyodide's CI. However, the package's CI can run all of its tests in Pyodide.
This should help tremendously with locating and fixing subtle Pyodide-only bugs.

## Improvements to package loading

We have also updated micropip to be able to load binary wheels (which must have
a filename ending in `-cp310-cp310-emscripten_3_1_14_wasm32.whl`) and to be able
to generate custom lock files. We also added the capability of specifying custom
lock files in `loadPyodide`. Custom lock files feature may help significantly
with loading time for certain applications and can also be useful for people who
want to add extra packages to their repls to be loaded with
`loadPackagesFromImports`.

## Rust and CMake support

Pyodide can now build Rust packages! In fact, PyO3 packages just work with
almost no extra configuration. [This blog
post](https://blog.pyodide.org/posts/rust-pyo3-support-in-pyodide/) has a
breakdown of the technical issues that needed to be fixed for this. The main
Rust/Python integration tools [PyO3](github.com/pyo3/pyo3/)
[setuptools-rust](github.com/pyo3/setuptools-rust/) and
[maturin](github.com/pyo3/maturin/) have added Pyodide to their test suites.

We also made progress with CMake support. The current status is that we know how
to build most CMake packages but it requires specialized knowledge. Hopefully
future work will make this simpler.


### Acknowledgements

Thanks to everyone who contributed code to this release and to all users who
reported issues and provided feedback. Thanks to the PyO3 developers Messense
and David Hewitt, to the Rust developers and Sam Clegg who reviewed PRs to
improve the Rust Emscripten target. Thanks to Samuel Colvin for adding Pyodide
to the [pydantic](https://github.com/pydantic/pydantic-core) CI and providing
helpful feedback. Thanks also to Christian Heimes for continuing to work on
improving core Python Emscripten support.

The following people commited to Pyodide in this release:

Alexey Ignatiev, Andrey Smelter, andrzej, Antonio Cuni, Ben Jeffery, Brian
Benjamin Maranville, David Lechner, dragoncoder047, echorand (Amit Saha),
Filipe, Frank, Gyeongjae Choi, Hanno Rein, haoran1062, Henry Schreiner, Hood
Chatham, Jason Grout, jmdyck, Jo Bovy, John Wason, josephrocca, Kyle Cutler,
Lester Fan, Liumeo, lukemarsden, Mario Gersbach, Michael Droettboom, Michael
Gilbert, Michael Neil, Nicholas Bollweg, pysathq, Ricardo Prins, Rob Gries,
Roman Yurchak, Ryan May, Ryan Russell, stonebig, Szymswiat, Tobias Megies, Vic
Kumar, Victor, Wei Ji, Will Lachance
