---
title: "Pyodide 0.25.0 release"
date: 2024-01-03
tags: ["release", "announcement"]
author: "Pyodide team"
showToc: true
TocOpen: false
hidemeta: false
comments: false
# description: ""
disableHLJS: true # to disable highlightjs
disableShare: false
hideSummary: false
searchHidden: true
ShowReadingTime: true
ShowBreadCrumbs: true
ShowPostNavLinks: true
---

Happy New Year! Pyodide 0.25 is a major release with some exciting and
experimental features. This major release includes `requests` library support,
experimental support for JS Promise integration, and build system improvements.

## `requests` Support in Pyodide

For a long time, the Pyodide community has been requesting support for the
[`requests`](https://github.com/psf/requests), Python's popular HTTP client
library. However, due to the limitations of Pyodide running in a browser
environment, integrating networking libraries presented challenges. So,
traditionally, if you needed to do something networking-related in Pyodide, you
would need to use the `pyfetch` API, which is a wrapper around the browser's
`fetch` API.

Another workaround was to use the
[`pyodide-http`](https://github.com/koenvo/pyodide-http) by
[@koenvo](https://github.com/koenvo), which provides a patch mechanism for
common HTTP libraries, including `requests`, `urllib`.

With this release, Pyodide now provides native support for `requests` without
the need for patches. How does it work?
[@joemarshall](https://github.com/joemarshall) has contributed a new adapter for
`urllib3`, a backend of `requests`, that uses Web APIs supported by Pyodide
instead of native sockets when running in a Pyodide environment.

Try the following code snippet to see `requests` in action:

```js
await pyodide.loadPackage("requests")
pyodide.runPython(`
  import requests
  license = requests.get("https://raw.githubusercontent.com/pyodide/pyodide/main/LICENSE").text
  print(license)
`)
```

Please note that `requests` in Pyodide are still subject to browser constraints,
including CORS policies and limited access to low-level networking features not
accessible from the browser. However, we hope that this new feature will make
Pyodide more useful for many users.

## Experimental Support for JS Promise Integration

A very common problem encountered using Pyodide is the need to call an
asynchronous API in a synchronous context. For example, the `requests` library
would be most naturally implemented in terms of the browser `fetch` API, but
`requests` is a synchronous library and `fetch` is asynchronous so this is
impossible.

An experimental new browser feature will hopefully change this.
[The JavaScript Promise integration API](https://v8.dev/blog/jspi) allows us to
make async calls from a synchronous context. For example:
```js
// run Python code in an environment that can stack switch
py.runPythonSyncifying(`
  from js import fetch

  def sync_fetch(url):
    resp = fetch(url).syncify()
    text = resp.text().syncify()
    return text

  print(sync_fetch("https://example.com"))
`);
```
This will work in node v20 with the `--experimental-wasm-stack-switching` flag
or in Chrome with
`Experimental WebAssembly JavaScript Promise Integration (JSPI)` enabled in `chrome://flags`.

This feature is a work in progress, and in particular it will take some time to
smooth out the interaction between the event loop and `syncify()`. We are very
excited about the possible applications.

## Build System Improvements

Pyodide's package build system is continually evolving to enhance user
experience and compatibility. In this release, we introduce the following
improvements:

- **Meson Backend Support**: We have added support for the meson backend, which
  numpy and scipy have recently adopted.
- **Enhanced Support for Conda environment**: We have improved the build process
  within the conda environment.

We are actively working on improved support for out-of-tree builds to make it
easier to build packages. We hope that these improvements will make it easier
for users to build packages for Pyodide.

## Acknowledgements

Thanks to everyone who contributed code to this release and all users who
reported issues and provided valuable feedback. Particularly, we would like to
thank Joe Marshall and Koen Vossen for their substantial contributions to bring
networking libraries to Pyodide and Loïc Estève for assisting us in debugging
scipy and scikit-learn issues.

Additionally, we always appreciate the support and assistance from the
Emscripten team.

The following people commited to Pyodide in this release:

[TODO]